Relationship between WebTransport, HTTP/3 and QUIC (#146)
ietf-wg-webtrans/draft-ietf-webtrans-http3: draft-ietf-webtrans-http3.md

WebTransport server is an application that accepts WebTransport sessions, which
can be accessed via an HTTP/3 server.

# Overview

## WebTransport, QUIC and HTTP/3

"QUIC: A UDP-Based Multiplexed and Secure Transport" {{!RFC9000}}
defines QUIC security, stream multiplexing, reliable and ordered streams,
stream HoL blocking avoidance, flow control, and congestion control.
The transport layer provides these services to applications but does
not constrain how streams are used.

HTTP is an application-layer protocol, defined by "HTTP Semantics" {{!RFC9110}}.
HTTP/3 has specific features that are not part of the HTTP semantics: QPACK
header compression (static and dynamic) and Server Push. Of these, only

> static decompression is mandatory to support.

Reviewer: QPACK static header field decompression

Reviewer: And huffman literal decoding?  @vasilvv mentioned this was the most annoying part, wondering if we can create a profile or setting opting out of huffman support.

Reviewer 2: These comments don't appear to have been incorporated. The text now says: "While WebTransport requires HTTP for the handshake, it doesn't require HTTP for anything else. HTTP/3 offers two features in addition to HTTP Semantics: QPACK header compression and Server Push. Neither of these can be used to the benefit
of WebTransport after the handshake succeeds."

WebTransport over HTTP/3 makes it possible for an application to directly access
QUIC transport via an HTTP/3 connection. HTTP/3 is the application mapping for
QUIC, defined in {{!RFC9113}}, which describes how streams are used to carry control
data or HTTP request and response message sequences in the form of frames, as
well as describing details of stream and connection lifecycle management.

> However, although WebTransport requires HTTP for its handshake, it doesn't require

Reviewer: However and although are redundant?  Just "Although WebTransport..." ?

HTTP for any other part. This makes it possible to create a minimal WebTransport client
or server that supports only the semantics required to complete the handshake.
This involves generating/parsing the request method, host,
path, protocol, optional Origin header, and perhaps some extra headers;
generating/parsing the response status code, and possibly some extra headers.
The receiver can likely perform checks using bytestring comparisons.

Rather than having to interact with QUIC streams via HTTP semantics and

> HTTP/3 frames, a WebTransport session allows direct access. This relies on

Reviewer: maybe "interact with QUIC features" and "allows direct access to them"

Reviewer 2: It now says "WebTransport over HTTP/3 makes it possible for an application to directly access
QUIC transport via an HTTP/3 connection.".

the WebTransport handshake (extended CONNECT method) to provide some prior checks.

> This is important or the Web security model where same-origin and cross-origin resource

Reviewer: s/or/for/?

Reviewer 2: fixed.

WebTransport server is an application that accepts WebTransport sessions, which
can be accessed via an HTTP/3 server.

# Overview

## QUIC, WebTransport, and HTTP/3

QUIC version 1 {{!RFC9000}} is a secure transport protocol with flow control and
congestion control. QUIC supports application data exchange via streams;
reliable and ordered byte streams that can be multiplexed. Stream independence
can mitigate head-of-line blocking. While QUIC provides streams as a transport

> service, it is unopinionated about their usageage. Applicability of streams is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
service, it is unopinionated about their usage. The applicability of streams is
```

described by section 4 of {{?RFC9308}}.

HTTP is an application-layer protocol, defined by "HTTP Semantics" {{!RFC9110}}.
HTTP/3 is the application mapping for QUIC, defined in {{!RFC9113}}. It
describes how streams are used to carry control data or HTTP request and
response message sequences in the form of frames, as well as describing details
of stream and connection lifecycle management.

WebTransport over HTTP/3 makes it possible for an application to directly access
QUIC transport via an HTTP/3 connection. This relies on the WebTransport

> handshake (extended CONNECT method) to provide some prior checks. This is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
handshake, which uses the extended CONNECT method, to perform important checks. This is
```

> important or the Web security model where same-origin and cross-origin resource

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
necessary for the Web security model where same-origin and cross-origin resource
```

> access is very important. Post-handshake, QUIC streams use header bytes for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
access may not be the same. Post-handshake, QUIC streams use header bytes for
```
Or some better way to say this

> accounting purposes, but after that an application can use QUIC streams however

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure I totally follow this sentence. What is it trying to say?
Is this trying to say that WebTransport uses HTTP/3 to convey header bytes via a QUIC stream, but then eventually just uses the QUIC stream directly?

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's trying to say that a WebTransport application has access to QUIC streams, other than the header bytes?

it would like. This is similar to WebSockets over HTTP/1.1, where access is

> enabled to the underlying bytestream after both sides have agreed the handshake.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
enabled to the underlying bytestream after both sides have completed the handshake.
```

As a result, WebTransport layering appears as follows:

~~~~~~~~~~ drawing
|       WebTransport       |
|  Punch  | HTTP Semantics |
| Through |   HTTP/3       |
|          QUIC            |

> ~~~~~~~~~~

Author: ![punchout](https://github.com/ietf-wg-webtrans/draft-ietf-webtrans-http3/assets/6571445/9ba9eaaa-4949-4eca-a443-a1c166b35e4d)

{: #fig-webtransport-layers title="WebTransport Layering"}

> While WebTransport requires HTTP for its handshake, it doesn't require HTTP for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While WebTransport requires HTTP for the handshake, it doesn't require HTTP for
```

> any other part. HTTP/3 offers two features in addition to HTTP Semantics: QPACK

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
anything else. HTTP/3 offers two features in addition to HTTP Semantics: QPACK
```

Reviewer 2: fixed.

WebTransport server is an application that accepts WebTransport sessions, which
can be accessed via an HTTP/3 server.

# Overview

## QUIC, WebTransport, and HTTP/3

QUIC version 1 {{!RFC9000}} is a secure transport protocol with flow control and
congestion control. QUIC supports application data exchange via streams;
reliable and ordered byte streams that can be multiplexed. Stream independence
can mitigate head-of-line blocking. While QUIC provides streams as a transport
service, it is unopinionated about their usage. The applicability of streams is
described by section 4 of {{?RFC9308}}.

HTTP is an application-layer protocol, defined by "HTTP Semantics" {{!RFC9110}}.
HTTP/3 is the application mapping for QUIC, defined in {{!RFC9114}}. It
describes how QUIC streams are used to carry control data or HTTP request and

> response message sequences in the form of frames, as well as describing details

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
response message sequences in the form of frames and describes details
```

of stream and connection lifecycle management. HTTP/3 offers two features in
addition to HTTP Semantics: QPACK header compression {{?RFC9208}} and Server
Push {{Section 4.6 of RFC9114}}.

WebTransport session establishment involves interacting at the HTTP layer with a
resource. For Web user agents, this interaction is important for security
reasons, especially to ensure that the resource is willing to use WebTransport.

Although WebTransport requires HTTP for its handshake, when HTTP/3 is in use,
HTTP is not used for anything else related to an established session. Instead,

> QUIC streams begin a header sequence of bytes that links them to the established

Reviewer 3: If I'm understanding correctly:
```suggestion
QUIC streams begin with a header sequence of bytes that links them to the established
```

> session. The remainder of the stream is the body, which carries the payload of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
session. The remainder of the stream is the body, which carries the payload specified by
```
or
```suggestion
session. The remainder of the stream is the body, which carries the payload supplied by
```

the application using WebTransport. This process is similar to WebSockets over

> HTTP/1.1 {{?RFC6455}}, where access to the underlying bytestream is enabled

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
HTTP/1.1 {{?ORIGIN=RFC6455}}, where access to the underlying byte stream is enabled
```

> HTTP/1.1 {{?RFC6455}}, where access  to the underlying bytestream is enabled

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
HTTP/1.1 {{?RFC6455}}, where access to the underlying bytestream is enabled
```

> HTTP/1.1 {{?RFC6455}}, where access  to the underlying bytestream is enabled

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HTTP/1.1 {{?RFC6455}}, where access to the underlying bytestream is enabled
```

after both sides have completed the handshake.

> The layering of QUIC, HTTP/3 and WebTransport is shown in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The layering of QUIC, HTTP/3, and WebTransport is shown in
```

{{fig-webtransport-layers}}. Once a WebTransport session is established,
applications have nearly direct access to QUIC.

~~~~~~~~~~ aasvg
,--------------------------------,
|            WebTransport        |
,----------------,---------------,

> | HTTP Semantics |               |
> ,----------------, Nearly direct |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| HTTP Semantics |               |
|       and      |               |
| Session Setup | Nearly direct |
,----------------,               |
```

|     HTTP/3     |               |
,----------------`---------------,
|               QUIC             |
`--------------------------------'
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #fig-webtransport-layers title="WebTransport Layering"}

### Minimizing Implementation Complexity

WebTransport has minimal interaction with HTTP and HTTP/3. Clients or servers
can constrain their use of features to only those required to complete a
WebTransport handshake:

* Generating/parsing the request method, host, path, protocol, optional Origin

> header, and perhaps some extra headers

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
header, and perhaps some extra headers.
```

> header, and perhaps some extra headers

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
header, and perhaps some extra headers.
```

* Generating/parsing the response status code, and possibly some extra headers.

The receiver can likely perform several of its HTTP-level requirements using
bytestring comparisons.

While HTTP/3 encodes HTTP messages using QPACK, the complexity can be minimized.
Receivers can disable dynamic decompression entirely but must always support

> static decompression and Huffman decoding. Senders can opt to never use dyanamic

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
static decompression and Huffman decoding. Senders can opt to never use dynamic
```

> compression, static compression, or Huffman encoding. support and to minimize
> their use of  this can be constrained by disabling dynamic compression

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
compression, static compression, or Huffman encoding.
```

> compression, static compression, or Huffman encoding. support and to minimize
> their use of  this can be constrained by disabling dynamic compression

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
compression, static compression, or Huffman encoding.
```
